Okay, just to follow up the last question I was asking on the alfar.
I know you've written some, at least one essay, I think you've also published some books
having to do with, with Tolkien's, Lord of the Rings, Middle Earth.
I haven't published a book, but I have been represented in a couple of books of Tolkien
criticism.
I was a Tolkien fan before it became so terribly popular.
Yeah, I know that.
Okay.
Okay, was there any relationship between Tolkien's eos in the alfar?
Only in the sense that they both come from the, the British and Norse mythology.
Tolkien is a linguist and he was studying the relationships between, between the languages
of Scandinavia and those of Middle English.
And the Elf people came probably down with the Vikings, or those who preceded the Vikings,
Norse, Norse migrant people were moving down into the British Isles.
And in Norse mythology, of course, the Troll folk, the people of the, the people of the
hill and things like that were always, always sort of there as some, somehow, sometimes
sinister, sometimes very beautiful, sometimes with a good and sometimes with a bad relationship
to man.
But always they were there, as you might say.
They were always in the background of all that mythology and Tolkien used them.
And I used them too because they are a factor in human thought and they are an archetypal
image in humanity.
Paul Anderson's story, the Queen of, the Queen of Air and Darkness place on this.
That's one of the big images which come from the pictures of the Troll folk in relationship
to humanity.
Right.
Yeah, I'm, I'm familiar with that particular work.
By the way, my field, I'm an English teacher.
My field is Middle and Old English, so I respond very much to this, this kind of, you know,
folklore and so forth.
Listen, okay, back to the house between the worlds for a moment.
I think you were deliberately a little vague on this because you probably didn't want to
specify, but the, the idea of the game table where these people, you know, play Dungeons
and Dragons, sometimes they're actually playing the game.
And then sometimes when the gate is there, they're actually manipulating the gates between
the universes.
Is that, is that the way you meant it to be taken?
More or less.
It was sort of a, well, I can't think what else, what else Dungeons and Dragons and
Dragons or something.
Okay, yeah.
But one of the, one of the people at the game board near the end of the book, they've taken
our Thurian names, you know, from Knights of the Round Table.
And I think you said that they've been playing that game since the days of Arthur or something.
I wasn't sure what you meant by that reference.
Well, I'm not, I don't know.
It just, sometimes things come to an author and you don't know what it means, but it
seems to have an incredible rightness somehow.
And you just can't, you, you, you have to, I tried to rewrite that several times because
I said, well, that doesn't really mean anything.
And I, I don't know what it means, but every time I tried to change it, it didn't feel right.
And so I finally put it back the way it had come and figured, well, maybe it will mean
something to somebody else.
Maybe, maybe there's some deep meaning to it that I'll, I'll know later about.
Maybe it was just a laziness, but as I say, I kept feeling that there was some meaning
to it and every time I tried to change it, it didn't feel right.
So I let it stand.
No, that's what I figured.
Why didn't that something to my editor because he liked it and wouldn't let me change it?
No, I responded to it.
I thought it was fine.
You know, and I, I realized I was sure you didn't mean it to be anything specific, but
it added to the atmosphere of the book and I enjoyed it.
I just thought I'd ask in case.
That was what I was trying to do.
Okay.
Listen, do you have a, I always ask an author this.
I guess I shouldn't, but I want to see what comes out.
Do you have any, among your works, do you have any favorite books?
Well, usually, whenever anybody asks me anything like that, I remember the line in Kristen
Lavin's data, which is one of my favorite books where she said that the one of her
children she was thinking about was always the one she thought was the nicest.
And I think that probably an author's latest book is always the one he likes best because
it's had, had, you had a chance to improve on the things that, that were, you didn't
think were right in previous books.
But I think if I had to say one, one book of mine is the favorite, I would say it is
the, the double set of Charise, of Heritage of Haster and Charise Exile.
And the one that I think is technically best is Storm Queen.
Okay, fine.
Yeah, I think I read that about the Heritage of Haster one, or Haster one time that you'd
mentioned that.
Um, listen, let me just ask you a couple questions about your, your method of writing.
Um, do you, I, do you sit down with a theme or an idea in mind and start writing, or do
you just write and something comes out of it naturally?
Well, I do both.
I write naturally and spontaneously, sort of to keep my creative juices flowing.
But when I'm actually writing a book for publication, I sit down, I try to create a
character that is interesting to me and that I think people will enjoy reading about.
And then I just, but that character have adventures.
And so, uh, in, in having the, in, in letting this thing, I always know where I'm going
when I start a book, because I have been known to start a book and never be able to finish
it because I didn't know where it was going.
I hadn't planned enough, hadn't planned it out meticulously enough.
So I always know when I start a book, when I actually start a book, roughly where it
is going, but I sort of wander from here to there and then afterward cut out the things
that aren't applicable because it keeps me thinking about what's happening.
I do tend to sort of daydream over my stories and characters and every now and then
some, some idea, picture pops into my head and I will keep on.
For instance, the shattered chain popped into my head because I had a picture of
Kendra, the free Amazon lurking about around the house, outside the house of
Jalak in the dry towns ready to rescue somebody.
I didn't know who she was going to rescue.
I didn't know why she was there.
I just had this picture.
And so I tried to figure okay, who is she trying to rescue and why, and I figured,
well, it wouldn't be important enough if it was just one of her relatives.
And then Lady Rihanna popped in and everything became clear and the book just went on from there.
Okay, good.
I've read before and I think I sort of agree with this, that science fiction is not noted as a,
as strong in characterization, as strong in adventure and action and plot,
but kind of weak on character.
But I've always thought that you are probably one of the strongest of all science fiction writers
in terms of characterization.
You make your people very real and it seems to me you go to great lengths to make them
deep and round and believable.
Is that something that comes naturally to you?
Do you have to work at that?
Well, actually, I think it comes naturally to me because my characters are very real to me.
They are real to me, very real to me and they, I sort of live with them and I feel that I know them very well.
So I sort of live with them a while and they become as real to me as people I might meet in the street.
If I met one of them in the street, I would know immediately who she or she was.
Okay, fine.
Really, I don't create stories and have characters that will fill them.
I try to fill my stories up with characters who are capable of doing the things they're supposed to do.
I mean, if you want a man to go out and hunt a bear, you can't make him a little panty ways to have spent his life in a library.
But on the other hand, I don't twist my characters.
I started out envisioning Damon, for instance, who wrote into the story Spell Sword.
It was supposed to be about Andrew, but Damon sort of walked into the story and all of a sudden I knew that he was going to wind up using the Spell Sword,
even though I made it clear that he didn't consider himself a great swordsman, had no very great ideas of his own abilities.
Okay.
Do you have time to read much science fiction or fantasy these days?
I don't read an enormous amount when I'm working because partly I'm afraid of obvious overlaps and unconscious plagiarism,
but it's also true that when I'm writing it, I like to keep my mind clear for the fantasy universe I'm working in.
When I'm writing, I mostly read travel books, biographies, another thing of characterization, personal confessions.
One of, for instance, I recently read Anna Perna, A Woman's Place, which is a book about women mountain climbers,
and I'm positive that that one is going to show up in the city of the sorceresses, which is two or three years down the road.
But when I'm not working specifically between books and when I'm stuck on a book for a long time, I do read a great deal of fantasy because it's what I like to read.
One of the reasons I write, I say only half facetiously, is because I never get quite the story I want to read.
I'll read somebody else's book and say, oh yes, but I wanted to do something else and I'll go write a story that comes out that way.
Okay, this next question, you don't have to answer this if you don't want to.
A lot of authors would rather not, but when you do read fantasy or science fiction, are there any particular authors that you admire or think are especially good?
Oh yes, there are great many. I still think writer Haggard is probably the best of fantasy writers, and C. L. Moore, Theodore Sturgeon, Henry Cutner have all had a very great influence on me as a merit.
I'm very fascinated by the work of E. Hoffman Price. I love everything Sturgeon has ever written.
I am not really terribly fond of hard science fiction, though I remember fondly Arthur Clarke's Prelude to Space and some of the very early Heinlein's when I was much younger than I am now.
I'm sort of outgrown technology fiction, I think. I'm very interested, I love Tolkien, obviously.
I am very, very turned on by the work of Ursula Ligien. I like Patricia McKillip's work very much. I think Elizabeth Lynn is going to be a very fine writer one of these days. I like her early work a great deal.
I think Lisa Tuttle is a good writer. I tend to gravitate toward women writers because they tend to handle relationships between people better.
Men tend to get so interested in the conquest element. I read, for instance, a lot of the Conan books before finding out they were all the same, sort of ho-hum another day, another dragon, another damsel in distress.
Yeah, you're right. When you started writing, there were what, just one or two women writers in the whole field of science fiction, weren't there?
Well, there were a few more, although not really in the science fiction field. I, of course, have always been fond of fantasy and there were great many women in that.
Weird Tales was edited for many, many years by a woman, Dorothy McIlray. Famous Fantastic Mysteries was edited by Mary Nightinger.
There were great many women in fantasy. It was just hard science fiction, which appealed mostly to young men and to engineering students or so the editors fondly believed, where women were sort of taboo.
It was like the audience was supposed to be young white males and so it was like the audience for Western stories.
The Embower, Bertha Bower, had to call herself just the Embower because they believed that the young cowboys who read the stuff would not be willing to read stuff by a person named Bertha, which sounded like a little old lady knitting socks.
But she was one of the very best of Western writers and eventually they were able to cope with it and let her be so. Let her be what she was.
Okay, in the years that you've been writing science fiction or been involved in it heavily, I guess at least 30, have you seen any big changes?
Well, part of it is when I started writing it, it was once again, it was sort of technological daydreams for young engineering students.
A lot about spaceships and journeys to the moon and the conquest of stars and gadgets and all that sort of thing.
In the middle 40s, the work of Theodore Sturgeon and even more the work of the Cutner pair and anybody who has read the books very seriously knows that Catherine was the dominant writer of that pair.
C.L. Moore wrote a lot of the stuff with the Cutner pen name on it because once again the audience was supposed to be mostly male and the two of them were working so closely together that they never cared who wrote a specific story.
It was all just Cutner and Moore.
But a lot of the stories that appeared with Hank's name on it were Cutners and Catherine, like many women, is more interested in the effects of gadgets on people than she was in gadgets and she almost single handed reformed the whole field.
There was a time during the 40s and early 50s when the Cutners, when the two Cutners wrote almost everything that appeared in the big magazines under a variety of pen names.
They'd have three or four stories and an issue sometimes.
And so gradually, also because Hank and Catherine were both preparing to work with psychology, they were both studying to be psychotherapists, they became very interested in the causes of people's behavior.
I think this may be one reason I admired them so much because I was in the study of psychology myself, intending to be a therapist in special education for children.
But I found out the work was too grueling for me and it tore me up too much emotionally because I am too much of an empath.
So I think the big change has been away from technology itself and into the effect which technology has on people.
And then when you start delving into people's minds, what you come to is fantasy under which they cloak their deepest feelings and desires.
You might say the very depths of their unconscious where nothing is censored.
Fantasy is, you might say the subconscious with the self-censor turned off.
Okay, excellent. That's a fine answer. I just have about two more.
I wish you'd asked me something about my new Arthurian novel.
That's exactly one of them. In fact, let's see, I think one of the last books I was looking through of yours, at the end of it they had a little note that she's now working on a book about Arthurian women or something.
And that's one of the questions I was going to ask.
Well, all my life I've been fascinated by King Arthur, but even more I've been fascinated by Morgan Le Fay.
Valerie didn't approve of her and she's been treated as a sort of evil sorceress, quote unquote.
And you can hear the capital letters all the way from Texas, I'm sure.
So I started wondering who Morgan Le Fay and the Lady of the Lake really were.
And in the, there were a lot of books on the search for the historical Arthur, but I started out on the search for the historical Morgan Le Fay.
How did she get into the legends?
And it led me into the byways of pagan religions, into druidism, into, I don't mean the modern thing, but what Caesar wrote about.
And enormous amounts of ancient, you might say ancient culture.
So I finally came up with the realization that the whole Arthurian cycle is based upon the shift from druidical and Celtic religions to Christianity.
And in the Celtic culture and the Celtic mythology and the Celtic religion women were preeminent, whereas in Christianity, St. Jerome and St. Augustine tried to convince every woman that she should be constantly doing penance and covered with shame for the very fact that she was a woman.
And that ghastly culture shock, I think, pervaded the whole Arthurian mythos.
Valerie didn't get hold of it until later.
Well then what did you do? You wrote a, what, an historical novel then?
I wrote a, I took one element of fantasy. The idea that as our beliefs in the world change, our world changes with it.
The idea that people used to act and believe as if the world were the center of the universe and now we know that the sun is at the center of our galaxy but that we're way out on the edge of it and that changes our relationship to ourselves and our world.
When people believed that the source of life was just the mother, that was one belief system which very firmly and deeply pervaded their consciousnesses.
And then when the idea came that the mother was incidental, that man was created in God's image and women was just a poor imitation, it must have been a monster culture shock.
And so I gave the idea that the world actually changed at that time.
That the religion, the idea of only having one God instead of a pantheon of God changed people's minds.
So I took one fantasy element, the idea that as these old world, as people's ideas changed, the world changed too.
So the world where the elves lived sort of went into another dimension, being replaced by a world of pagan religion and then when the world changed again, the world of pagan religion, what I call the world of Avalon, went into the mists.
The final title of the book, which Knopf is publishing this September, it was The Mists of Avalon.
I called it Mists of Magic, but Knopf is a very staid and conservative, not to say stuffy, publishing house.
And they associated the word Mists in the title of these sort of Isle of Benedict Arnold, where I was Napoleon the Great's lover.
And so they didn't, the kind of book that has a naked lady with an exposed boozer on it.
Right, okay. But the book then, the book's intention is not one of these kinds, it's supposed to be a retelling of the Arthurian legends or anything like that.
It's sort of the telling of the Arthurian legend from a 180 turn, as it would look not from the days of the Christians who worshiped the Father God and conquest, but from the eyes, through the eyes of the pagans and of the priestesses,
who saw the turn to conquest of Father God, one true faith, as being a flying in the face of everything they believed, a truly unreligious attitude to the life of the earth.
Okay, listen, what we can do on that, I'm glad you gave me the title and the publisher. We'll give Knopf a call and see if we can get a copy of that and go ahead and have a little show or two on that right before it comes out.
You said it'll be September?
Uh-huh.
Yeah, that's fine.
They'd probably be delighted to hear about it.
Okay, good. We just did that with a book by Brian Aldous, The Heliconia Spring, which is a beautiful book. I don't know if you read Brian Aldous at all.
I know who he is. I've read a couple of his books, but he's not one of the people that I read constantly and addictively as some others.
I admire his work very much, but it is not the kind that I'm passionately involved and emotionally committed to.
His latest one is entirely different, This Heliconia Spring. If you get a chance, it's a beautiful book.
Well, I'll certainly have a look around for it.
Okay, listen, one more that I can think of. David here wants me to ask you about the Society for Creative and Acronism, because he's involved in that himself. Are you still working in that?
I haven't been in it for many years. It got so involved in politics and politicking, and people were not interested nearly so much in going out and having a good time wearing costumes and being sort of the middle ages the way they should have been.
They were interested in becoming a king and getting all kinds of honors, and I sort of dropped out, but I'm still very interested in the ideas promoted, but the people who are doing it sort of annoy me.
Okay, listen, is there anything else you would like to get on the show or anything else you'd like to mention? We've taken a lot of your time already.
Just a very short thing. I am very interested in a lot of the ideas. People are always asking me why I write science fiction when there are so many other things or why I'm not into mainstream fiction, and I have written mainstream novels.
But my feeling is science fiction is a very... and fantasy, of course, is a very valuable genre because it forces people to think. You can't just... oh, I suppose you can in the slam bang action stuff, but even in those there is a residue of what if the world were different than it is now?
People in our society and in our schools are supposed to keep tight to reality and not imagine things and don't be so imaginative, and I think imagination is the one great thing that distinguishes us from the beasts, and science fiction is a very valuable corrective to modern education because it makes people think and it forces them to stretch their imaginations which get sort of atrophied in the average school.
In other words, you would be probably one of those writers who think that science fiction should be kept separate from mainstream?
Yes, very strongly so. If we just integrate it into mainstream and go, you might say, cote-o-ing to other academics to get into schools and colleges and things, I don't think anything could hurt science fiction more than becoming required reading in schools.
People should read it because they love it and because they want to think about the subjects discussed in it.
Okay, that's good. Yeah, a lot of authors like some of the new way people like Norman Spenrad, for instance, have told us that they should be one thing, that the division is artificial in the first place and shouldn't be there.
Oh, well, Norman Spenrad.
Yeah, okay. Well, listen, Miss Bradley, this has been an excellent interview. Your answers were very sharp. I think we'll probably get five or six shows out of this.
What we do is we're on each day of the week for only five minutes, unfortunately. So we take an interview and sort of chop it up into as many shows as we can, and usually it lasts for five or six or even seven sometimes shows.
So when we get these edited, I assume, oh, there'll probably be some time in late July or early August, we will send you the copies of the tapes.
At this time, I don't think there's a station in your area that's carrying it. So we couldn't send you a station number where you could hear it, but you will have the tapes exactly as they will go on the air.
Oh, thank you.
So listen, we really appreciate your time and I am certainly looking forward to your future work. And thank you very much for the interview.
Oh, you're very welcome. It's been nice talking to you. Bye.
Okay, bye.